In this section, we are going to discuss about various character classes used with regular expressions.
We will begin with DOT character class.
A DOT represents any character in a search pattern except new line that is slash DN or the Unicode value
for slash and is 2028 and slash R that is Unicode value 2029.
Let's take an example.
I have a string and want to search all words beginning with W.
After W, there can be any character, and after that character there has to be n so the pattern can
be returned.
W dot n where dot means it can be any character.
I'm going to type the code here.
I'll say let str is equal to.
I have this string where I have two words wonder and windy.
So we'll try to search for w any character and there is an n after any character.
So I'm going to write the pattern w dot n.
Of course I'll say slash G for global search and let's use console.log and I will use the match method.
So I'm specifying a pattern.
Let's run the code now.
As you see it returned to values w0n and w i n.
Of course it did not return the entire world in both the cases.
If you want that the word which begins with W then any character and it should have n after that.
Then after n there can be any number of characters that also we want in the output.
That is, we want to have entire words instead of these three characters.
One and win what we can do.
We can use a character class slash w.
That is a class which we are going to see after some time.
But at the moment, let's try the W and one more quantifier.
We are going to add it with slash W and we'll run the code.
Now you see the output.
It has returned the entire world's.
As mentioned, that DOT searches all the characters except for the new line.
This I have already discussed in the tutorial where I explain slash se, but still we will try the same
here with previous score.
So let's add slash and instead of oh in the word vendor and run the code.
Now you see that the output returned is windy.
The vendor, which now has slash and instead of oh, is not returned because slash and is not treated
as any character.
So what?
If you want that, DOD should consider slash and or slash R as a character?
The solution to that is add slash as flag in the pattern.
Let's try to add it after the global modifier.
And we run the code.
Now you see that the word W slash n and the R is also returned as the new line is treated as any character
criteria by the dot.
Let's try one more example with a different search pattern.
Now I'm showing a search of words where the first character of word can be any character.
Second character should be H, and then it can have any number of letters.
So the pattern will be like this.
I'll set dot.
So the beginning of this word can be anything.
The character can be anything.
Then we have etch and then rest of the word, let's do the same thing in the coding also.
And for that, I'm changing the string here.
I'll say, This is what that is.
Now let's run the code.
So looking at the output, you can easily understand what actually happened.
For all the words this wart and that the dot represents t, w or t second letter is h, and rest of
the words are returned because we have given W plus.
Dart is used to mention any single character whose position can be in the middle start or at the end.
That doesn't matter.
The next character class we are going to learn is slash D.
The slash T searches for digits in the string.
Let's directly jump into the example to understand.
I will say that SDR is equal to.
I teach HTML five, CSS three, REACT 16.8 and in fact it can be 16 16.1 and so on.
Angular eight plus that is eight onwards.
So six for whatever number you think of, that's fine.
But we are just giving a number.
Let's try the pattern here.
So I'm going to say slash D, the console log will remain same.
And let's run the code.
Because Slash D is given in the search pattern.
It started to search for digit.
Though it returns only one digit because we haven't given a flag for global search.
So let's do it.
Let's add slash G and run the code.
So now you can see that all the digits from variable str are returned in the output array because string
contains six digits, the output array is of six elements.
The next character class we are talking about is slash D, but this is uppercase and the purpose of
this class is it searches for non digit values.
The previous slash d that is lowercase slash D was searching for digits.
This does the reverse of it.
So in the same previous example, if we change lowercase slash dx to uppercase slash dx, it will do
the reverse.
That is, it will return all the characters other than digits.
Let's use uppercase slash DX and run the code.
As you can see, the output contains all the letters other than digits.
All right.
So the next character class is really very important, and that is slash W.
It searches for word characters.
Now, what does that mean?
We have already seen W Plus, which returns the entire world.
When you give this flag, it will return all characters between Capital A to Z, small A to Z, 0 to
9 and an underscore.
But let's say a string has an exclamation sign, a dot and M percent or other such characters, then
those are ignored.
To see this practically, let's create a string which has special and regular characters.
I'll say let str is equal to yes, an exclamation.
I do know.
And that is n percent ten times.
I'll also say I underscore say.
Now the pattern will be w of course, the global modifier.
Let's try to run this code and see what is the output.
As you can see in the output, exclamation dot and ampersand are not returned, but the underscore is
returned along with other word characters.
Slash W is very useful and we can execute a search which returns only words which we have already seen
using W plus that is the class and the quantifier.
So here if I add a quantifier with slash W, then it will return words from a string.
Let's try the same thing here.
I'll just add a plus sign and we'll run the code.
Now you can see that the output contains words and not individual characters.
Now the next character class is uppercase W.
Now again, it does absolutely reverse of the lowercase W the way lowercase W finds word characters.
Uppercase W finds the other characters, meaning it finds non word characters.
Let's simply change lowercase w to uppercase in the previous example and see the output.
So now it has returned spaces exclamation and percent and dot.
So all the non word characters are returned when you use uppercase W.
One more useful character class is Slash s, which searches for whitespace characters.
Whitespace includes a space, a tab, a carriage return that is slash are a new line that is slash DN
vertical tab, which normally we don't use nowadays in JavaScript, but slash vs for vertical tab and
form feed that is slash F.
Let's try a simple example where we just say that we have a tab, a new line, and we try to run the
code.
So I'll say let s t r is equal to a string where I'm going to put slash t after this doo and slash DN
before time.
So now we have spaces slash T and slash and all these are whitespace characters.
Let's run the code.
As you can see, the tab and new line character is return along with spaces.
If you use the next character class that is uppercase s, then it does absolutely opposite to the lowercase
s that is, it searches for non white spaces.
A non-white space means it doesn't fall under the criteria which I mentioned for white space that is
slash and slash, TV and slash F, etc..
Let's try the same code and we just change lowercase SX to uppercase and we just run the code.
And now you see that all the characters are returned, but no spaces.
No slash T slash n is returned in the output.
So these are the character classes we have discussed.
I also want to mention that slash and slash tea, all these can be treated as character classes as well.
So, for example, when you want to search for New Line, then you may use slash N.
If you want to search for only a tab in the string, you may use slash T slash R for carrier's return
and so on.
For example, I want to search all new lines in a string.
Then the pattern can be slash dn and of course the global modifier in case if you want all the tabs
and new lines to be searched in a string, then you can use the pattern slash and slash DX.
But we're going to put that in square brackets if you just want to search slash DN, let's try to search
Slash and only first, then we can write it like this.
Let's say if you want both tab and new line to be searched and then you put a square bracket and you
can write it like this.
Let's run the code.
Now as you see that it has returned tab and new line both in the output.
So this was just a basic idea how to use character classes.
Now we know that we use square brackets, we use quantifier, and we use character classes as well that
are complex patterns as we move ahead in the tutorial.
We'll try more practical, more complex patterns by combining 20 fires, maybe character classes and
other options available in regular expression.